The Honourable Prime Minister is coming among us
[Music]
[Praise]
Namaskar On behalf of the Ministry of AYUSH, heartiest greetings to
all of you on the first International Yoga Day.
Inaugurating the International Conference on the topic Yoga for Holistic Health, we call upon you to present the Sir Vandana of
Goddess of Knowledge, Maa Sharda,
composed by poet Suryakant Tripathi Nirala.
[Music]
Artists of Gandharva Mahavidyalaya are presenting this
Kundu
Tushar Haar
Dhwana or
Shubhravastravrita
or Veena
Danda Adorned Karaar
White
Padmasana or Brahma Chut
Shankar Pratibhi
Dev
Sada Batatu
[Music]
Saraswati
Bhagwati Ni Shesh Jad Paha Varde Varde Fill the
Veena Vadini Fill the parde parde bodes
Veena Vadini
Varde Our dear independent
sound is our mantra New India Fill the fill fill fill do not fill do not break
cut the blind heart's bondage Seventy-fourths The blind heart's
bondage Seventy-fourths Maha Janani Jyotir Manne Jar Maha
Janani Jyotir
Manne Kalush Bhed  In the midst of darkness, the waves of the moon rise and fall Veena Vadini
Varad
[Music]
Nav gati Nav laya taal Chang Nav nava gati Nav laya taal Nam Nav bandhan Janan scene Jarad scene Nav nava ke nava baagh me sako Nav nava ke nava vihag vihand ko nava parn swar de na Badini Pard Veena Badini Barad
Veena Badini [
Music]
Bad Yoga is a rich cultural heritage of India.
Today 21st June is being celebrated as Yoga Day in 192 countries of the world. It is a
matter of pride for us that representatives
of 26 countries from different parts of the world are
participating in the international conference organized on this occasion. We request the
Minister of State for AYUSH (Independent Charge)
Shri Shripad Yesso Nayak to please
welcome everyone and express his views
Respected Prime Minister of India
Shri Narendra Bhai Modi Ji My colleague in the
Council of Ministers MS Finance Shri
Jayant Sinha Ji Friend of the Yoga Tradition
in India Swami Ramdev  Dr. Achar
Nagendra Ji Dr. Veerendra Hegde Ji
Secretary of Ministry of AYUSH Mr. Sunil
Ji Eminent Gurus in the Audience Members of
Diplomatic Corps The Invited Guests and
Delegates in the International Conference
Officials of the various Government Ministries
and Departments and other Organizations
Members of the Media both print and
electronic And Friends It gives me immense pleasure to
welcome you to this
International Conference on Yoga for
Holistic Health This is a momentous occasion in the
history of our country and the world as we are
celebrating the very first
International Day of Yoga adopted by the
United Nations I feel that this is a very
fitting occasion for such a gathering of scholars
and practitioners interested in the subtle nature
of the subject of Yoga in all its
dimensions and particular focusing on the
aspect of holistic health Yoga is one of the
greatest gifts of the country to all
mankind  Probably it is the region where many as
177 out of 193 UN Member States not only
supported the idea of ​​declaring 21st
June as the International Day of Yoga but also to
spread the resolution. This global arrival
of Yoga at the initiative of the Honourable
Prime Minister will align the world
forces to a new thinking and approach to
the problem of humanity and mankind which is
living on the age of the unification of the
body, heart, mind and soul. As the Honourable
Prime Minister spoke of the Rajput today morning, we will
create the harmony among
mankind and with nature. The world is logging
for it was a new day at Rajput today.
Ladies and gentlemen, let us take this light
forward in
all honesty. Everyone
in today's world is subjected to various types
of stress in life. In the modern times,
our life has become mechanical, our life is
oriented around.  More than ever nobody is
having time to look or to enjoy the inner
peace of pain Yoga helps a person to find
peace and happiness through yoga. There is harmony
between the body and mind as well as mind
and spirit. The harmony helps the person
to lead a peaceful and happy life with every
human being aspiring
for health. Aspect of yoga has become a
most significant and modern medicine has also
started recognizing the value
of the same. Yoga is largely being used in
disease prevention and for agent therapy and
even stands as a system of many dimensions
of the health care. The biggest challenge of the
health sector today is the large burden of non-communicable
diseases. Conventional medicine is
not having permanent and cost-effective solution to
the problem of communicable diseases. Many times
yoga can play a great role in overcoming this
problem both in terms of prevention
and management.  Science of Yoga provides
rich benefits in different fields. It is
beneficial in the health problems related
to working in the high altitude areas,
working in the extreme climatic conditions
and under various stressful situations.
Yogic techniques can be used for IT
workers, industrial labourers and sanitary
workers. Yoga can enhance the endurance of the
sports person. It can improve the memory,
concentration power to the students. It can
help in improving the skills besides providing
widening the health benefits. I would like to congratulate the
noble Prime Minister for his vision to
pave the way for the declaration of International Day of
Yoga. I am from the Asian country,
for Yoga can increase further in the
coming years and will help in making Yoga popular
across the globe. Thank you very much
Jai Shri Shripad Nayak. We express our gratitude to him. The
credit for spreading the consciousness of Yoga to the entire world goes to the Honorable
Prime Minister.  Swami Ramdev ji has been a pioneer
in awakening the different aspects of Yoga in our country in the last few years.
We
request him to please address everyone on this occasion today.
Today is a very fortunate day for 125 crore Indians
and for about 7 billion people living in the entire world
with the support of 177 countries and that too with the
support of 47 Muslim countries who have
provided this good fortune. The one who has given such a virtuous leadership, who has become the
heartbeat of this country,
besides being the hero of our country and also in the role of a Raj Rishi,
first of all I congratulate such an Honorable Prime Minister.
Yoga is the heritage of our ancestors,
a unique
knowledge of the sages which
is universal, scientific,
secular
so that it lives up to the principles.
We should assimilate that scientific, universal and secular knowledge
in our life as a way of life. We should accept Yoga not as a sect but as
a way of life. That is
why today the Prime Minister
said in the morning itself that today the Rajpath has become the path of Yoga,
it has become the path of life
and truly
Yoga  When yoga becomes a part of our lifestyle, when it becomes
integrated into the lives of every person, when
our life, our family, our society, our
nation and the world become yogam, only then will overall
health improve.
Swastha is not only based on the body, but also on the basis of the mind, on the basis of the
body, on the basis of the mind and also on the
basis of super mental consciousness.
Yoga is the means to achieve health. Today, around 10 lakh crore
rupees are spent on diseases
in India, in the organized and
unorganized sector, if we look at the whole world, a
huge budget is spent on it.
Just yesterday we were hearing that around 100 people have
died due to drinking alcohol. This is an
accident. If we want to stop such accidents, we will have to
come on the path of yoga. There we will become
healthy and will also become pure. Being pure both at the same time
brings purity in our lives. So today I would like to
say this in brief.
Many people were saying many things
that Modi ji had come to bring good days,
how did he get involved in the work of yoga? Brother,
Modi ji is bringing good days, politically
also, but whoever does yoga, his day will
definitely be good.  It is guaranteed that
good days will begin with yoga.
Good days will begin because when every person
becomes healthy, free from disease, will be free from hatred, will be
fearless, there will be energy in his body, there will be
energy in his mind, when he awakens the
source of infinite energy in his consciousness, then every human being will
become a great human being. This is the power of yoga and for this
Sri Aurobindo had said that I want to
see the incarnation of super-mental consciousness on this earth, I want to
see humans as great human beings. Yoga is that method, hence the
respected Prime Minister said rightly in the morning that
yoga is not just an exercise and its
first step, we have to go beyond that, we have to exercise,
our muscles should be sacrificed,
Swami Vivekananda ji
said that but to go beyond that, we have to increase body strength, morale,
self-strength and
we have to establish ourselves in one with a global force, so
yoga should come in our daily routine
and in our conduct, in daily routine
we should adopt exercise as asanas, pranayama and meditation
and in our conduct we should adopt it as purity, as effort, as
truth and honesty,
when we adopt it
completely.  So definitely as
a fully developed human being, Yoga will give
us strength, it will give us power and the holistic consciousness of Yoga, Chi Vritti
Nirodha Tada Drisht Swarup Asthanam Samatvam
Yoga Ute Yukta Haar Viharas Yukt Chase Yukt
Swapna Bodh Yoga Bhavati Dukh Ya, will
descend within us and after attaining
health of body and mind, by binding ourselves in the thread of Vasudeva Kutumbakam,
world brotherhood, co-existence and collective unity, by
following Ashtanga Yoga, by following Kriya Yoga, by
attaining the ascent of Sila Samadhi and Prajya, we will find ourselves as a fully developed human being, we will find
not just an individual within us, but the whole within us,
Aham Brahmasmi, this is the
ultimate aim of Yoga that a person should be able to unite not small
units within himself but the entire whole
within himself, the
method for this is Yoga, we will have to take it to a long term, we will have to
assimilate it in our daily routine,
we will have to make Yoga assimilate in every person, the
world should become a part of Yoga and there should
also be scientific research on it, we should be able to include it in the system also.
Today I would also like to request the respected Prime Minister
that under his holy leadership, Yoga has
got a great honour after many centuries and this is
a huge contribution of respected Modi ji for the entire humanity. In a way, it is a
boon for this earth and I
praise the work he has done. I want
further research to be done and in this too,
he should play a leading role and
give us all the good fortune that we
all should take this work forward together in this field. I have only
one goal in life. In the coming 50
years, I have thought that if we can make each individual and the
entire world together in Yoga, then
it will be a great blessing in our life.
My heartfelt
greetings to everyone. Accept Yoga as the path of life.
Swami Shri Ramdev ji said a very meaningful thing.
We express our gratitude to him.
Multi-faceted
personality, social worker, skilled in creating a beautiful balance between spirituality and materialism, Dr. Veerendra
Hegde had organised a huge Yoga class in 2013
in which
6282 people participated and which has been
mentioned in the Guinness World Records. Even
today our  He is in the middle, we request him to
please address everyone.
Honourable Prime Minister of India Shri
Narendra Modi Ji, seated on the stage, creator of a new society through Yoga and Ayurveda,
Shri Baba Ramdev Ji,
Yes Vyas Ka Shri Nagendra Ji, best wishes to
all the respected gentlemen present in the gathering on
World Yoga Day. We
pray to Shri Kshetra Dharmasthala Bhagwan Shri Manjana Swami
that his blessings always be upon all of us.
We are our Guru and proud that we are Indians. If we
look carefully at the history of our country,
this country is loved by everyone in the world for its incomparable and unique wealth.
Spiritual, physical,
natural, unique and many other types of treasures are
here. These are the fruits of our ancestors' devotional practice
and dedication for thousands of years,
which we have received in the form of treasures.
Seeing all this, some countries have attacked
our country many times with the intention of acquiring material wealth
and some have
even looted these material wealth. On the contrary, some people
came as inquisitive with the desire to acquire the knowledge wealth of this holy land and by
studying with devotion, some people also became learned.
One such example is of Alexander
who came to this country with the intention of acquiring the immense wealth of India.
When Modi was about to attack India,
his guru, the great philosopher Aristotle,
asked his disciple to bring five things from India: sacred soil, water from the Ganges River, the Bhagavad Gita, the Bhagavad Gita, the Banshri, and a saint. Today, India has to
become great again with its immense knowledge. It has to
spread the importance of Yoga all over the world. According to the saying "body is the medium of life, religion is the means", it has to
show the way to adopt health, Ayurveda, and spirituality. The declaration of June 21st as
World Yoga Day by the United
Nations is a
matter of immense joy for all of us.
On this occasion, I thank the Government of India and the Honorable
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, from the bottom of my heart.
Since Modiji became the
Prime Minister, he has
traveled to many countries, created an environment of love and brotherhood with everyone,
brought immense wealth for the country's economic progress, and is
sharing our treasure of spirituality and morality with the world.
On this occasion, I would like to inform
that for the first time, a small
plane powered by solar energy came to India by two pilots, Button and Bosch, who
completed a flight of 35,000 kilometers.  It took 500 hours to cover
just the ocean distance. The
pilots had to fly the plane continuously for five to six days. The
pilots' guru,
Sanjeev Banot, who lives in Switzerland, had
trained the pilots in yoga and meditation and had made arrangements for practicing yoga in the cabin. The
pilots took the help of yoga and meditation to control their body and mind.
Our youth are requested to understand the
importance of Indian culture, adopt it and
feel proud. By
acquiring Kshema skills through Yoga Kshema Maham Yoga, become Acharyas in the world through Yoga. No
one
can control the rush of progress and development in the world. In the rush of economic development, it is
also necessary to remain mentally balanced. Therefore,
in this fast-paced life, just as a smart
rider controls the horse with his intelligence,
similarly, by having a meaningful attitude towards life through Yoga,
everyone can lead an ideal life. Today is
also a sign of the same.
We are not just saying this in a speech.
In India, we started the first Yoga and Naturopathy
Medical Science School
in a college in 1990 in Dharmasthala.  It was
started under the Sri Dharmasthala Manjana Deshmeshwar
Shikshan Sanstha.
Students from 30 states and four other countries are currently studying in this school and till now
800 students from this college have become Prakritik Practitioners and
Yoga Vaidyas and are
serving in this direction in the country and abroad.
Yoga which is the
ideal blend of knowledge, action and devotion will be
celebrated with great joy as Yoga Day every year on 21st June all over the world.
In this context, wishing everyone present with great pride on
this historic day, with the
prayer that India may once again become the Guru of the world and give the auspicious message of life today,
salutations to everyone. Jai Bharat Vande
Mataram. Dr. Veerendra Hegde said a very beautiful thing - do
yoga to keep the mind controlled.
We express our gratitude to him. Dr. H.R. Nagendra is the Chancellor of Swami
Vivekananda Yoga Research Institute, Bengaluru.
He is the
Chairman of the Expert Committee of International Yoga Day.
Dr. Nagendra has made a special contribution in the overall celebrations of Yoga Day in the country.
On this occasion, we humbly request him to
please address everyone.
My dear brothers and
sisters, yoga experts,
elders and all, I am highly grateful to you Prime
Minister.  Mr. Narendra Modi ji is taking Yoga all
over the
world with the purpose of bringing it all together,
make world family what can happen with
Yoga and the first thing he has to do is to have a
separate ministry and our Shripad Nayak
ji has been bringing a new dimension to
Yoga and a wonderful program he had this
morning. Thanks to the meticulous planning and
execution of our Secretary Nilanjan ji
and the Joint Secretary Anil Kanari Vallej
and I have been given the mandate to chair the
International Day of Yoga and I place on
record the wonderful cooperation all the Joint
Secretaries have given to us to make this such a
big success. Joint Secretary Shri Gariv ji
and Jitendra Sharma ji and Shrivastava ji
and the Director of Maharaji Desha Nation
Yoga Basre ji have placed on record the great
work that has been put forth by all of them day
and night 24 hours to make this grand.
Success and to the yoga who joined us in our
committee to bring out this common protocol
and that was a great achievement for us in this
wonderful as well
note the world health organisation
defines health as not merely a disease but an
emergency state well being at physical emotional
social and spiritual
levels and we love that prevention is better than cure but how much does it really mean
the world
spectrum look at the budget the world over how
much is spent for
prevention hardly any part of the entire
budget ayush ministry as this
prevention non pharmacology approach yoga nature
husbandry and real dimension ayurveda and
others and therefore it is time we invest more
and more in the prevention aspect and
also for promotion of positive health and
that is one can reduce the cost in a very
big way yoga access here in a cost effective way by we will be able to do
and with great
thrust given by prime  Minister, we are saying that
yoga can become very effective as the
modern medical system and can also raise it
to the higher level so it can become the mainstream
in years and decades to come and it is going to be our
great contribution of
yoga to the entire humanity and for
bringing total health.
I was inviting all yoga masters and
others to join hands and work together in harmony
to bring this dimension of
total health through the country.
Thank you. Dr. Nagendra said that
yoga can play an important role in modern medicine. He
said very beautifully. We
express our gratitude to him. The winner of the competition for the logo and tagline of International Yoga Day was
M/s Panchtatva Advertising.
You can see the logo created by them in the background.
Joining of both hands is yoga. The brown leaf is the symbol
of earth, the green leaf is the symbol of nature. The blue colour is the symbol of water element, the
glow is the symbol of fire element and the sun is the
symbol of energy. Their tagline is yoga for harmony and
peace. Shri Sanjay Narayan Singh,
Director of Panchtatva Advertising  Miss
Ruchi Kapoori is
coming on stage to receive the award on behalf of the agency. We request the
Hon'ble Prime Minister to
please award her ₹2500000.
This logo which you are seeing right now is being
awarded for Panchtatva
Advertising.
On the occasion of International Yoga Day,
two commemorative coins of ₹ and ₹ have been prepared by the Ministry of Finance.
Minister of State for Finance Shri Jayen Sinha will
present these to the Hon'ble Prime Minister for the inauguration. We request the Hon'ble
Prime Minister to kindly inaugurate these commemorative coins
[praise].
As you can see,
in the middle of both the coins is the Singhmukhi Ashoka Pillar,
below it is inscribed Satyameva Jayate,
Bharat in Devanagari on the left and India in English on the right. On the reverse side is the
International Yoga Day logo,
surrounded by Yoga for Harmony
and Peace in Devanagari and
Yoga for Harmony and Peace in English.
[praise]
On this historic day, the Indian Postal Department has
prepared a commemorative postage stamp of ₹.
Chief Post Master General of the Indian Postal Department
Delhi Circle Mr. Vineet Pandey will present the
first copy of the postage stamp to the Hon'ble Prime Minister
for its release and we
request the Prime Minister to please
release these commemorative postage stamps.
As you can see, the
logo of International Day of Yoga is printed on the commemorative postage stamp.
We express our gratitude to the Prime Minister for the release
and humbly
request him to please, with the support of his
inspiration,
my colleagues in the Council of Ministers,
Mr. Shripad Nayak Ji,
Mr. Jayant Sinha Ji,
Swami Ramdev Ji,
Dr. Nagendra Ji,
Dr. Dage
Ji, fellow participants
of Yoga Assemble here today and all over the
world. Today we are
celebrating the first International Day of
Yoga. I
spoke at the United Nations General
Assembly on 27 September
2014, urging the world
community to adopt an International Day of
Yoga. I did not know the
kind of unprecedented
response. Our
proposal was passed by the Community of
Nations on 1
December
1943. The United Nations General Assembly
approved the
proposal by
consensus with record.
177 countries have signed this day. This is
a very big event in the history of the UN.
As I stand here today,
International Day of Yoga is being celebrated
across the
world. Millions of people
around the world are
participating in this
event from
sunrise in the Far
East to sunset in the far corner of the Western
Hemisphere. People will join in this great
celebration of Yoga today
in
India. This morning,
millions of
people participated in simple yoga
demonstrations on
Rajpath in state and district capitals,
in
community groups and in their homes, also together in
yoga as coming together with
brother and sister in other countries. Bringing
heart and mind
closer, I am also
happy to release here today a commemorative coin
and poster.
I am grateful to
the international community for their support. I will also
support this great traditional yoga not just for
India but for the
individual and society to discover the sense
of  Oneness with self, with each other and
nature, the reach and spread of
yoga.
It cuts across
differences of color, class and creed. I am
told that there are communities of yoga
practitioners in almost every country in the
world, from the banks of the River
Indus, every continent in the
world. Yoga promotes harmony between man
and nature and a holistic approach to health
and well-
being. It should be said that yoga transforms life.
Those who are familiar with yoga know
that yoga is a way of life. There is no
person among us
who does not want to live life to the fullest.
Everyone wants to live life to the fullest.
And I say with confidence
that
yoga is the herb to live life to the fullest.
[Music]
In order to benefit fully from yoga, to understand
yoga in itself, one must
understand who is a
yogi. A yogi is a person who is in harmony with
himself, his body,
and his surroundings.
Yoga is the means to achieve harmony
from the
Upanishads bring the idea of ​​Yoga to
transform human consciousness through
control of body and senses through
constant
practice The body is the tool for realization
of the Supreme
By Bhagavad Gita The song of the world It is a call to
action and defines it as Yoga Shastra
From Gita Yoga is karma
kaushalam to yoga
Extensive
work with devotion and without attachment Yoga From
Gita
Yogas and Gurus is
a vision of the discernment of a
yogi Yoga is a vision for
harmony It is an abode
of mind A distinct form of system
Many people see Yoga as a system
Yoga is not a system
Yoga is a state
Yoga is not an institution Yoga is a faith
and until we find it in that form we
cannot recognize its wholeness
People on think Yoga is just a set of
exercises Yoga is a philosophy of discipline and
meditation Transform the spirit and make the
individual a better person In thought, action,
knowledge and
devotion  Problems of modern lifestyle are
well known to people. Suffer from stress related
elements. Lifestyle
related diseases like
Diabetes,
Hypertension, found way to control
communicable diseases, burden of disease, to
non-communicable
diseases. Young
people need peace, seek refuge
in food, alcohol,
AIDS. Practicing yoga helps combat stress
and chronic
conditions. Body is a temple of the mind. Yoga
creates beautiful temples.
The benefits of yoga are many. Do
n't practice
correctly and with discipline.
Yoga leads to perfection. Body's potential in strength, skill
and general well-being. Peaceful
and stress-free
living.
Sometimes, in recognizing the power of yoga,
we make the same mistake as we do
in recognizing ourselves. A
person who has
not
seen a tree, if he does not have the knowledge that a tree grows from a seed, and if someone
tells him about a seed and tells him that
look, this seed has this potential, how great a
tree it can become, then he will not believe it and will
ask hundreds of questions. But if that small seed is
nurtured properly,  Be it food, energy, water or the
support of nature, the same seed gets converted into a banyan tree.
God has given all the powers within the human being as well. It is not that he has given it to
me and not to you. Every
human being has been given this capability,
but the one who knows the art of nurturing it,
who gets the opportunity to develop it,
who develops it gradually under the system, under faith, through
practice, then
he
too can
attain the heights of an excellent life.
God has given the
innate will power in every living being to rise above where he is.
Yoga is a medium to create that situation
and
hence, those who do not have knowledge and experience
doubt whether it can be
possible through yoga. But
for the one who has understood the story of the tree made from a seed, it is possible. If a seed can be converted into a banyan tree, then
even a human being can
attain the state of Narayan. Aham
Brahmasmi
Ramdev Ji is saying that we
get the ability to absorb everything, water, consciousness, within ourselves when we expand ourselves.
Yoga is a kind of
journey from self to the whole.
Yoga
is a way of going from ego to we, and
therefore, whoever wants to go from ego to self, whoever
wants to go from self to all, whoever
wants to learn to live with nature, Yoga takes him by the finger and
takes him there. He himself has to walk
and in that sense, the
world should know its potential.
Today it is a matter of happiness
when those of us who
entered the 21st century from the end of the 20th century,
remember that moment. The
whole world
celebrated with joy wherever the rays of the sun went.
When the century changed, how was that moment? Today the
world is experiencing that moment again.
Wherever the rays of the sun are going, they keep anointing Yoga.
This journey is going on from the west to the east and the west. A
similar opportunity has arisen like the
moment of the formation of the 21st century at the end of the 20th century, and the world had experienced it, and
today the world is experiencing it for Yoga.
For every Indian, for every Yoga lover, for a
person sitting in every corner of the world, there can be
no greater pride than this and
in that pride when we move forward  Increasing Control
and Mastery of Our Life
Energizer and Disease Free Life Capacity
for Full Enjoyment of
Life
Opening and
Refining
to the Needs of Others
Fully Developed
Mental
Powers Leading to Higher Concentration Intelligence
Creativity
Engine Liberation of Our Spirit from Ignorance
Suffering
Incapacity Leading to Freedom Equality
Constant Joy Full Day and Inner Strength Overcome the
Challenge of Life
It Awakens the Deeper Sense of Unity and Oneness with the Whole
Universe and All Living Beings Gathering
to the Realization of Our Highest
Divine
Perfection at the Community Level The Erosion of
Individuals The Yoga Results in Reduction of
Greed, Cursing and Violence in Thought and
Action Names Reduction in the Cost of Health
Care and Social
Support Drama Reduction in Conflict and
Misunderstanding Within Family, Communities
and Between
Nations Increases
Correlation and Effective Teamwork in Business
and
Community Compassion to All
Beings Plants
Animals and Humans  and long term and
ecological thinking in socio-economic
planning increase
power of
innovation technology a
deeper impact of art music poetry
dance up quality of life and an overall
increase in peace of human development and
change sum up in the world of
access seeking after mjam
yoga promises rest and balance in suffering from
mental
stress yoga promises
work in dictation
yoga creates focus create
concentration in word your
yoga promises strength and
courage healthy body and discipline mind are the
foundation of world free from
fear in crafting a new world yoga
creates a new
word leave in world divided in
word in conflict over material
gay word in conflict over failure to understand oneself from other how shall we understand oneself from other i do not
understand as in
swami vivekananda's book on
raja soul potentially
divide the goal to
manifest
divinity win by controlling nature
external and
external do this ire by work and
and control and philosophy by one and more far all of
and be
free this is the whole of
religion doctrines and dogmas and rituals and books and temples and from are but
secondary
details its
freedom to be free from misunderstanding from doubt from conflict and
leaders to world peace
we are at a point in history global
warming that the world as we know it
the world ecology is being transformed by human
greed and
access yoga so the way we consume a
healthy balance and in tune with
nature we will need to raise a generation to live according
to this principle we want to
leave the world habitable for future
generations as aurobindo said indian yoga is
potentially one of the dynamic elements of the
future life of humanity
it is a merging of secret
schools and it has taken refuge and is seeking its
place in the future some living human
powers as
utility the spread of yoga there is a simplification
of changing way in the
past yoga
practice  Today it is available to all in the words
of
Patanjali. It
represents a world where knowledge
flows without restriction of country,
creed, and
class. It represents a world where people come together across
boundaries for causes and
concerns that unite the planet.
You can imagine
that in Sri Aurobindo's time,
it was not visible
that yoga would become a subject for the common people. It was confined to a
very limited sphere.
But Yogi Aurobindo had a vision and
he saw that the time would come when yoga would become a
part of the lives of the common people. It would
not be limited to a few traditions or saints;
it would
reach every person. What Sri Aurobindo saw about 75 years ago,
we are experiencing today.
And this is the
symbol of the power of the sages and saints. And this power
comes from the dedication to yoga, from the experience of yoga, from
yogic life. The
closest parallel can be thought of in the
movement of protect the environment,
protect the world that we  Let us live in as we work
to make the benefits of yoga
accessible to the whole world. We will also
work to keep barriers to knowledge down, to ensure a
free flow of knowledge and information across
boundaries, and to
maintain an open world free of
discrimination. I greet you, my fellow
traveler, who is spreading the message
of
yoga. Greet you, my fellow practitioner in a
different
country, who are present here in this
speech. Yoga is a collective given to
humanity. It may have originated in India, but it draws
its energy from the millions who practice it
around the world. International Yoga Day is
not the brainchild of a government or of the united states.
It is a reflection
of the largest knowledge-by-people movement in the
world. It has ever seen a
movement of
people living, touched, and changed by
yoga. We will take this movement forward
for better health, fulfilled lives, and a more
connected community. It is the
spirit of
India. The collective energy  Of our
people To the creation of a more equal world
World without fear World of
peace We will be the
foundation of the Indian spirit and our
creative genius Reach out and foster a
culture of inclusiveness
Fraternity of one global family Vasudev
Kutumb Kam I will
and we Grand evocation of good
health and peace Shanti Pa Sarve Bhavantu Sukhana Sarve Santu Niramaya Sarve Bhadrani Pantu Ma
Kashit Do Bhaag Bhave May I be happy May I all be
free from
illness May I all CTV I
office May I no one
travel I wish you all the best on International Yoga Day
and this two
day
seminar The world's expectations from us will increase a lot
Now it is our responsibility
that how do we convey to the world the correct form of yog as per the world's expectations
and in a timely manner How do
we convey it to the world in a terminology that the world understands
I sometimes say
that there may be the
best mobile phone brand
but very few people
know its user manual,
mostly it is
related to Red and Green
Cutting the telephone, the telephone
and the one who knows its user manual, holds the
whole
world in his palm.
We don't even know the complete user manual of the software that God has given us. We don't even know what all God has given
us.
If
we learn to read that user manual through yoga,
then gradually we will learn to use it.
I sometimes fall asleep.
My handwriting is not good,
but you must have seen
that a
teacher who is very keen on good handwriting
teaches his students in the classroom,
but there are some children whose
handwriting starts improving very well
and there are some people who hold the pen in the same way, the pen is of the
best quality, the
paper is also the best of the best. The teacher
also works very hard, he also moves his hand in the same way,
but the handwriting does not improve.
What is the difference? The person
whose handwriting starts improving gradually
and a stage comes when no matter
how crowded he is, no matter how much
hurry he is in, if he is
moving towards old age, his hand starts
shaking a little.  Even if the handwriting is good,
he doesn't have to make any conscious effort, he
doesn't have to make any conscious effort, and it is a
natural state because he has
internalized it.
If someone whose handwriting is bad wants to write a letter to a particular person, he gets
one or two lines right,
then he falters
because he hasn't done it to understand yoga.
I believe that the child who
immediately adopted this in childhood, the
reason for good handwriting would be the
picture that forms in his mind,
his soul would be connected with it,
his intellect would be giving him orders, his
body would be acting, and that tradition would continue throughout his life.
Yoga is a small form of yoga,
and that is why I say that
we can achieve these states through practice and training. To
achieve these states,
if we, and it is true
that someone tells us very big things,
then it becomes difficult,
gradually the faith starts sinking,
but if we look at small things, we
realize that yes, friend, I can also do this,
I can also take two steps. We have to
bring the form of yoga in front of the world, that
brother, okay, not today, but let's take two steps.  You will
reach there.
If we make this, I
believe it will be a huge
benefit. India has a huge responsibility.
I say this with great responsibility that
if we make yoga a commodity, then
perhaps we will suffer the biggest loss of yoga.
Yoga is not a commodity. Yoga is
not a brand that can be sold. It
connects life, connects life with nature. It is such a
great purpose which
we have to fulfill and the world will
look towards India and this is true.
50 years ago, we had seen a shop
selling pure ghee in the market.
50 years ago, there was
no such shop selling pure ghee. But today it is
because the market has become commercialized. Such a situation should never
arise in the market of yoga.
Those days are still far away, but such a
day should never come that only our yoga
is the truth. Otherwise, you are
spending dollars unnecessarily,
this is not a business, this is not a system,
this is a state and
hence, for the welfare of the world, for the
welfare of humanity, to change the destiny of every person,
this is the contribution of the land of India. The work of preserving and
beautifying it is the work of India.
People from outside have also done this, we have to accept their debt as well,
we are not sitting here making it our father, it is
of the human race and for the human race,
it is not for this era but for many eras
and changes will also come in it according to the time,
those who,
as you were telling, must have done yoga inside the solar plane, so it is
possible that there was less space, so
they must have taught that yoga, you
hold your nose like this, put your feet like this, no one should raise your hands, do it like this,
they must have modified it, so
wherever there is a need, make changes in it to make it more
modern and more
scientific and if the work is put to the test of science, then
we will continue to do this work for the welfare of the world, we will have to do it and
we will keep fulfilling that responsibility,
once again I am indebted to the whole world, to all the
governments of the world, to
all the societies of the world in this entire campaign and I
express my heartfelt gratitude to everyone, thank you very much
[appreciation]
Prime Minister said that yoga has brought the world
closer in mind and heart, the
principles of yoga have eradicated all discriminations and
he said emphatically  Do yoga and live life to the
fullest Yoga is the path from ego to self
Yoga
is the path from man to Narayan by expanding oneself The Prime Minister addressed
everyone in very beautiful and meaningful words
We once again express our
gratitude and felicitation to him with a big round of applause
And now Secretary in the Ministry of AYUSH Shri
Nilanjan Sanyal will express his gratitude to everyone
Most Respected Rebel Prime
Minister Shri Narendra Modi
Ji Respected Rebel Minister of State for
AYUSH Shri Shripad Nayak Ji Respected Rebel
Minister of State for Finance Sinha Ji
AT Joga Guru on the Dias Swami Ramdev Ji
Dr Virendra Gad Ji Dr H R
Nagendra Ji Respectable MP Senior Official of
Government Diplomats Joga Guru Resource
Person and Expert from different parts of
the country and abroad International Delegate
Delegate from Joga Institution Members of
Media Ladies and Gentlemen from the
Ministry of AYUSH And on my own I feel honoured
and privileged to extend my
heartfelt thanks  To our noble Prime
Minister for gracing this historic occasion
and organising this memorable event. It is an act of
visionary leadership which resulted in the
declaration by the United Nations of the
International Day of Yoga within a short span
of only 75 days, a record in itself and
the grand celebration of the same in India
and abroad. Thank you very much Sir for your
vision and sparing your valuable time to
organise this conference.
I dedicate my heartfelt thanks to our Minister of State for AYUSH
Shri Shripad Nayak ji for his continuous
support and guidance in organising this
conference and sparing time for
organising this function. I also extend
my heartfelt thanks to our noble Minister of
State for Finance Shri Jayant Sinha ji for
sparing time on this occasion and the
support extended by the Ministry of
Finance to bring out the cumulative impact of the
occasion. My sincere thanks are also due to him.
Ministry of Communication and Information
Technology for the Ministry's support in
bringing out the beautiful commemorative
postal stamp My thanks are also due to
the winner of the logo competition for
being present in person to receive the
award I'll express my sincere thanks to the respected
Joga Guru Swami Ramdev Ji, Dr.
Virendra Hekar Ji, Dr. Nagendra Ji for their kind presence here
and making this okay
point My sincere thanks to the noble Members
of Parliament, the Joga Guru and
experts, resource persons, international and
delegates, national delegates whose
participation has set the tone for this
important conference I extend my
thanks to senior officers from different
ministry departments, state government officials,
media persons, police and Vigyan
Bhawan authorities, my colleagues from the
Ministry of AYUSH and other organizations
and all others who are present here to
grace this  Occasion Thank you one and all Jai
Hind We express our gratitude to Shri Nilanjan Sanyal May
India once again attain the position of Yoga Guru
With this good wish
we conclude this inaugural session
Hello
Honorable Prime Minister is
leaving us but our
program will continue All of you are requested to
please stay in your respective places Our next
session is now